---
layout: post
date: 2020-01-02
categories: [rant, societal-problems, personal]
---

It is a beautiful winter day here in California, the sun is shining and its in the low 50s, for a mid westerner like myself you couldn't ask for a nicer day.
All I wanted from today was to lay on my couch and read a book, I'm currently reading "The Emperor's New Mind"
by Roger Penrose. It's very different from my usual fare and (for me at least) requires a great deal of concentration.
Alas this was not to be as my neighbors decide it was a good day to blast music outside my window.

This started what was an unsatisfying exchange with the man, which has prompted my writing now on a problem I have experience too frequently
and that I'd like to dwell on here, that of dealing with noisy neighbors.

First I should qualify my opinions with the fact that I was raised in Ohio, in the countryside no less, and where I come from the houses are far enough apart that aside
from fireworks and gun shots one neighbor can easily ignore the sounds that eminate from another's property and domicile. So perhaps my opinions are skewed by a lifetime of relative peace.
For the last 4 years I have variably lived in the cities and the suburbs of the regions I have moved to, namely New York City and the
Bay Area. In this time I have always lived in an apartment and I have always had trouble with noise from neighbors. I should take a moment and
categorize the kinds of noise that I have struggled with so that you can have a clearer picture of what I'm talking about.

## Kinds of Noise

| Name | Description | Examples | Problematicness |
| Living Noise | Sounds generated by neighbors that share a wall, which are an unavoidable consequence of them living in their apartment | Unintended banging, vacuum cleaners, blenders, non-egregious stomping, dogs barking, etc | Low |
| Annoying Noise | Sounds generated by neighbors as a result of them being inconsiderate but not egregiously so. | TV, Radio or Music to loud, children screaming and playing too loud, etc. | Moderate |
| Egregious Noise | Typically not produced by direct wall sharing neighbors but by street neighbors or strangers in parks or cars, these are sounds that inhibit enjoyment of your apartment and which are often produced with full knowledge of their disruptiveness, often times the maker of such noises does so with mirth at your annoyance | Playing music on loud speakers at egregious volumes, shooting guns, shooting fireworks, etc | High |

Here I have made a very basic table of the kinds of noises one deals with in living in city apartments and it is by no means exhaustive or even particularly good, it serves merely to illustrate and to hopefully
communicate that not all noises from neighbors are a problem. Indeed living in a city is a noisy business and a certain low decible constant din is to be accepted and anticipated (this is everything in the first row "Living Noise").
Other noises are not exceptible and interfere with the peaceful coexistence that, I at least (and I hope most people) desire in an apartment). These are the noised in the second row "Annoying Noise" and the Third row "Egregious Noise".
These noises are not very different in their level of annoyance and are separated primarily by the result of their being made.
What I mean is noises in the second row are stoped or altered when one neighbor asks the offending neighbor to keep it down. Noises in the third row are not changed when neighbors complain or in the worse cases amplified.

The problem arises only in the third column, noise is just a fact of life and the second row only represents the common mistake we all make of forgetting that the world does not revolve around us. These instances are
unavoidable but offer us the ability to communicate with our neightbors and are not on the whole problematic, should a second row noise become habitual despite repeted pleas, then the noise becomes a third colomn noise.

So the distincion here is not so easily quanitifiable and can't be measured in a general way, which makes it a hard problem. The problem, in fact, is not noise, but behavior.
I am not an expert but my understanding is that humans have a unique advantage over other primates in that we poses the intelligence to coooperate in a shared goal. Our ability to amilcably resolve
conflict has carried us from the savanna to the mountains to the ocean and the moon. But I find (not uniquely, this is an old problem) that in dense urban societies this cooperative ability breaks down
is stupid ways. I want to speculate as to why, I don't think I can offer any solutions and I speculate that the solution is likely the sort that can't be generalized and widely applied, but instead is some personal
resolution that each person must make of their own accord.

## What happened
Back to my story from which I launched this ramble.
The boyfriend of one of the girls who lives in the building next to mine decided that the weather
was perfect for parking in our shared parking lot opening all the doors on his land rover and playing hip-hop music at an extreme volume.
I don't want to pass judgement on his taste in music, merely his sense of civility in his behavior with electronic speaker technology.
Needless to say that the music, designed to excite the listener broke my frail concentration and inhibited my ability to read.
This angered me, and my first thought was to attack him with food scraps from the garbage can that we keep in the parking lot, or perhaps to
throw eggs into his open car doors. Thankfully after a few deep breaths, such childish thoughts subsided and I resolved instead to try and talk it out with him. I walked out to the parking lot
and was disappointed to find that the man would not react to my attempts to get his attention, desiding instead to pretend not to hear me (maybe he actually couldn't hear me, the music was very loud after all).
Luckily his girlfriend emerged from her building and assured me that she would take care of it. Unsatisfied, I asked (I was shouting, but only because the music was so loud) that they not play their music so loud or
even just keep their car door closed.
When the man who was playing his music loudly decided finally to interact with me, his first statement was a sarcastic defense of his behavior that cited city ordinance.

"Is it 9 o'clock already?"

To which I replied, "No but I don't care what time it is, I'm asking you to do me a favor and turn the music down."

As if I hadn't said anything, "Well the law says I can play music before 9 o'clock, the law doesn't care about you do you understand that."

I then proceeded to appeal to his sense of civility and said, "Ok that's fine but can we just make our own rules with each other and take care of each other, I want to enjoy my home peacefully and I'd like you to turn down the music."

To which he replied "I don't have to."

The exchange continued in this way until he started dancing and smirking like a school yard bully.

## Analysis of What happened
So what happened there? Why couldn't I find common ground to communicate my dissaticfation to him without decending into a litigious "yeah huh, nuh uh".
Any number of things could be at play here for example:
* My approach was too aggressive and the man felt threated, relying on the law as his mandate.
* The man was a sorry son of a bitch and there was never going to be any reasoning with him.
* My pleas, while seemingly reasonable to me, made no sense to the man who's culture and background are so different from mine that basic matters of civility have no commonality between us.
* The man made a simple second row mistake but upon being confronted did not have the faculties to accept that he made a mistake and change his behavior, instead doubling down and elevating the situation into a third row incident.

I don't know what happened. Perhaps all of the above and then some, but I know this is a problem. I feel that I cannot communicate with my neighbors and my community about very simple things like this, without getting into
a litigious shouting match. I don't know if there has ever been a time where people could communitcate about such things. I know it is possible, I've had good neighbors that have been reasonable before.

I don't know what that guys problem is, but I know I can't do anything but try and take a different tact next time. I have to not get angry and I have to appeal to some other sense. Clearly we have no common language in civility.
Something is wrong with me, and my society. I can't say for sure what it is, but this shouldn't be this difficult.

I don't think this post is very useful. I don't think it adds anything to this conversation, but it's cathartic to write this all down.
